We're going to start by talking about
CF's role in Mac OS X as a whole.
Then we're going to look at some of
the concepts and paradigms there.
And finally, in this talk,
we'll be introducing the basic CF types.
So, when I talk about Core Foundation,
this is the big take-home point.
Core Foundation is the
lingua franca in Mac OS X.
Well, what does that mean?
A lingua franca is a medium
of communication between
people of different languages.
So what are the different
languages on Mac OS X?
Carbon and Cocoa Core Foundation is
a substrate layer that lives
beneath both Carbon and Cocoa,
so it provides the common
language by which those two
environments speak to one another.
As such, it bridges the basic
types between both stacks,
and provides those common services
that both stacks need to share,
things like the pasteboard,
the event model.
So, just as an example here,
you see the Carbon types on the right
and the Cocoa types on the left.
Core Foundation acts to convert to
and from the types on either side.
Hopefully you've seen
this diagram by now.
This is the basic
architecture on Mac OS X.
I want to point out the core
services layer that lives
below the application services,
the graphical services like
Quartz and OpenGL and QuickTime,
but above Darwin, the operating system.
That layer is where we live.
We provide the common services
needed by everything above us
that does not depend on graphics.
So if you look inside
the core services layer,
you'll see a number of the non-graphical
managers you're familiar with.
Things like the file manager,
memory manager, resource manager.
And in with all of those
is Core Foundation.
In fact, Core Foundation,
were you to look inside
the core services code,
lies below almost all of those.
So, what is CF?
It's a non-graphical substrate library
available to both Carbon and Cocoa.
In fact, it's even below Classic.
It is written in pure C because
that is the common language
beneath all of those layers,
and it's designed around some
basic object-oriented paradigms.
So, CF provides two basic
things to the system.
The first one is some basic
types by which all of the
different substrates can speak.
So that's things like strings, arrays,
and dictionaries,
and then we combine them together in an
abstraction that we call property lists.
The other thing it provides
is the non-graphical services
that every application needs.
So, that's localization support,
user preferences, as I said,
also the pasteboard and the run loop.
In this talk, we're going to focus on
the basic data types.
There's a follow-on to
this talk immediately after
lunch in this same room,
where we'll be talking about
the second half of that stack,
the app services.
So where is CF available?
On Mac OS X, Core Foundation is available
as its own library.
On 8 and 9,
it ships as part of CarbonLib.
Now there are some pieces
of Core Foundation that
are only available on 10.
Those center around the
mock-specific pieces,
which obviously do not apply on 8 and 9.
Finally, a subset of Core Foundation is
available inside of Darwin.
So if you're interested,
you can check out the Darwin source
code and see what we're doing.
So I know that as a developer,
when I go and approach a stack,
one of the first things
I don't want to hear is,
by the way, there's this other large
API I have to learn.
So if you don't want to learn CF, relax.
You don't really have to.
You're missing out,
but you don't have to.
Carbon and Cocoa are both
complete APIs unto themselves.
You can write entirely to
those APIs if you wish.
And Core Foundation will silently
help out underneath the stacks,
providing smooth communication.
However,
this is what you're going to miss.
If you yourself need to write code
that bridges between Carbon and
Cocoa applications-- for instance,
if you're writing a low-level library
that several different applications
are going to use-- you should be using
CF to convert the types to and from.
Internationalization support
is wired into Core Foundation.
It's one of the easiest
places to get it from.
There's a rich,
simple set of data types around
the internationalized strings
inside of Core Foundation.
That's what we're going
to focus on here today.
And there is some new functionality
which you can only get by talking
to the Core Foundation stack.
So what is that new functionality?
Property lists is a big one,
and that's the one
we'll talk about today.
There's also an XML parser
inside of Core Foundation.
It's not the only
XML parser on the system,
but it's the only one in C,
and it's nice and low level for your use.
User preferences:
There's a unified user preferences
model inside of Core Foundation.
It will save you from having to invent
your own preferences file format,
and doing your own work of
reading and writing to file.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly,
The bundle and plug-in model
that surrounds the entire app
packaging scheme on Mac OS X is
centered in Core Foundation.
So if you want to pull apart the
pieces of that app packaging format,
you should be talking to Core Foundation.
Okay, so now I'm going to move on to
talk about the basic concepts and
paradigms inside of Core Foundation.
I'm going to spend a moment on the
general philosophy of the library.
Then I'm going to talk about how we
manage to get some object orientation
inside of what is a purely C library.
And finally,
I'm going to look at the memory
management scheme that we use.
The general philosophy of core
foundation is to be lean and mean.
We are just barely above
the operating system layer.
Performance and efficiency
is perhaps our primary goal.
For that reason,
we have exported a minimal API and
tried to make it as powerful
and extensible as possible.
So you will not find a lot of convenience
functions to do simple operations.
You will find some complex, powerful,
functional API where you may
have to do some configuration
of the arguments going in.
Finally, there is no safety net
in Core Foundation.
We follow the same
philosophy as the C language:
if you tell us to do something,
we're going to do it, no questions asked.
So if you hand us a bad pointer,
we're going to try and access it.
To try and ease the road a little bit,
we do provide a debug library,
and that debug library is
available so that as you code,
you can run against it,
and it will catch a
number of common errors.
And that way you can start
to debug your program.
So, object orientation inside of
Core Foundation focuses on CF types.
And we try to make this as
available as possible in the
naming inside of Core Foundation.
So each type is opaque and
represents a pseudo class,
and each such type is
going to be named CF,
and then the class name Ref.
The related functions,
which are acting as methods on the class,
will always be prefixed
with the name of the class,
cf, class name,
and then an action describing
what the function does.
Related constants also are
prefixed with the class name,
k, cf, class, and then a descriptor.
So for example, if we look at CFStrings,
the type is CFStringRef.
An example of a function
would be CFString append,
and an example of the constant
would be kcf string encoding ascii.
Furthermore, inside the functions,
the first argument is
always the type instance,
what you would consider the
receiver if you were writing in
a true object-oriented language.
Now there's one important
exception to that,
and that's creators,
and we'll get to those in a minute.
We use common verbs to have common
meanings throughout the API,
so that CFArray add is going to work
the same way as CFDictionary add.
Finally, when we are passing
information back to you,
we will always put those out parameters,
the ones that are going
to be passed by reference,
at the very end.
There are a small number of
polymorphic functions inside of CF.
This is the entire list.
These functions can be
used with any CF type,
regardless of class.
So, equality and hashing,
CFEqual and CFHash,
that's what allows us to add objects into
collections and retrieve them out of it.
There's a little bit of introspection.
CFGetTypeId will return
the type ID of the class.
CF copy description will provide a
string description of the object.
This is for debugging purposes only.
These are not intended
to show to the user.
In fact,
they will frequently have the hex
address of the object embedded in them.
And finally, memory management.
We use a reference counting
memory management scheme,
so CF retain gains a reference,
CF release releases it.
CF get retain count is intended
for debugging purposes only,
so you can track how the
reference counting goes
through an object's lifetime.
And then CF get allocator allows you to
discover how the object was allocated.
So, as I just said,
CF types are reference counted,
retained to take a reference,
released to release it.
Anytime you have a
reference counting scheme,
you have this common problem of
who has the reference when an
object is returned by a function.
Here are the rules.
Very, very simple.
If the function you called includes the
word "get," you did not get a reference.
The object you called
retains the reference.
So if you intend to keep that object,
you'd better retain it yourself.
Functions that include the words
"copy" or "create," on the other hand,
give you a reference.
And when you are done with that object,
you must release it,
or else you will have a leak.
There is something important
to keep in mind here.
We are simply using copy and
create as a way of telling you,
the developer,
whether or not you've got a reference.
There may be some optimizations
going on in the back,
particularly in the case
of immutable objects.
So even though you've
received a reference,
copy may not actually
do any memory copying,
and likewise,
create may not do any allocation.
CF is simply being more efficient
and it shouldn't matter to you.
Allocators.
An allocator, there is a type for it,
CFAllocatorRef.
An allocator encapsulates
an allocation scheme.
You call an allocator to allocate memory,
to release it, to reallocate it,
and so on.
And every create function,
so every function that
could create a CF object,
takes an allocator as its first
argument and uses that allocator
to create the memory necessary.
Normally, you're going to want to
pass kcfallocator default,
which asks CF to use whatever
the current default allocator is.
There's one,
we have one that we install by default.
If you want to,
you can install your own to
do custom memory management.
That's all I'm going to say
on the basic structure of CF,
or the basic concepts.
And now I'm going to move on
to talk about some of the basic
types inside of Core Foundation.
We're going to start with CFString,
because that's probably the
most basic of the types,
the one that you're
most likely to be using.
Then we're going to talk briefly
about CFArray and CFDictionary,
which are two of our collection types.
Once we're done with that,
we'll look at how collections
and mutability work together
inside this library.
And finally,
we're going to see how all of that
comes together to form property lists.
Conceptually, a CFString is simply an
array of Unicode characters.
The goal in creating a CF type,
whereas I show here,
we're trying to get strings
to a new level of abstraction.
We're trying to solve
the 8-bit ASCII problem.
If we can do that,
then internationalization becomes easy,
because the basic type
throughout the entire system
will support Unicode characters.
Because we're at such a low level,
we've worked hard to assure performance.
So even though conceptually
you're looking at an array
of Unicode characters,
it may not internally be stored that way.
In particular,
you're not always going to be
storing two bytes per character.
And as we move forward,
CFStrings are becoming the
way to communicate strings
in all of the public APIs.
CFString maintains a very
rich functionality set.
There are a number of different creation
functions depending on where you may
have gotten your string data from,
whether it's coming from
a Carbon stack or Cocoa,
or you just read it out of a file.
There's a lot of support for encoding
conversions from CFStrings to
whatever encoding you need to use.
We will do comparisons, finds, searches.
There are some more complex operations
like exploding a string into its
component pieces or combining
the component pieces back again.
And there's even some printf style
formatting and parsing available.
So, let's look at some of the API.
For creation and access,
I give an example of a couple of
the basic creation methods here.
CF Create With Characters allows you
to take an array of Unicode characters
and create a string out of it.
Pretty straightforward.
If, on the other hand,
you're coming from a Pascal string,
for instance,
you would use the second function:
CFString Create With Pascal String.
There are several other similar kinds
of functions for the other types:
CFString Create With File System
Representation,
CFString Create From Data,
where you provide an encoding, and so on.
For basic access,
you'll use the next two functions.
CFString getLength returns the
current length of the string.
CFString getCharacterAtIndex returns
the character at the given index.
If you want more efficient processing,
you can get a range of characters at
once using CFString GetCharacters.
And if you have a CFString and find that
you need a Pascal string or some other
type to communicate with another API,
you can get it with
CFString GetPascalString.
Finally,
the last line there shows you how
you create a constant CFString.
CFSTR, all caps,
and then the string within quotes will
produce a constant CFString for your use.
Mutating, some CFStrings are mutable.
We'll talk more about that in a bit.
If you have immutable strings,
here are the basic functions you'll use.
CFString append appends another
string onto the base string.
CFString replace replaces a range
of characters inside the current
string with another string.
CFString insert performs
a straight up insertion,
and CFString trim is added
here as an example of more
complex functionality available.
CFString trim will take a trim string
and compare it to the beginning and the
end of the given string and strip it
off however many times it may appear.
Now, I said that CFStrings are becoming
the way by which strings are
communicated throughout the APIs.
So here's an example of this.
If you look inside the Carbon toolbox,
there's some old API you
may be familiar with:
setWtitle and getWtitle,
which set and get the title of a window.
After the introduction
of Core Foundation,
the API below it has been introduced:
Set Window Title with CFString,
Copy Window Title as CFString,
which allows you to set the
window title in a richer,
Unicode-ready manner.
Okay, another basic type
inside of CF is CFData.
CFData is simply a way to get an object
representation around an array of bytes.
It's more versatile than using a
simple void star or a struct pointer
because it's opaque and because it
encapsulates the notion of length.
And there are a couple
very basic accessors:
cfdata-get-length and
cfdata-get-byte-pointer.
I'm going to move on now
to talk about collections.
There are a number of different
collections inside of Core Foundation,
and by a collection I simply mean an
object which can hold other pointers,
and most of the time you're going
to be holding other objects.
CFArray and dictionary are
by far the most common of the
collections you would be using.
An array, as you would expect,
holds an ordered list of values,
and a dictionary holds
values as key-value pairs.
You give me the key,
I'll give you the value.
There are a number of less common
collections also on the system:
Set, Bag, Bit Vector, Binary Heap,
Tree are just a few of them.
There are actually
several others as well.
So, let's look at CFArray.
A couple creation methods:
CFArray create creates
an immutable array.
You give me an array of
values and the number there,
and I'll create an array around it.
CFArray create mutable
creates a mutable array.
And you will tell us the
capacity and the callbacks.
We'll talk about that in a moment.
Once you've got an array,
the basic API is CFArray get
count to find out how many
objects are in the array,
and then CFArray get value at index,
which will give you the
value at the given index.
CFArray insert value at index
is the most common mechanism.
CFDictionary.
You'll notice the naming
between CFDictionary and
CFArray is very consistent.
CFDictionary create creates
an immutable dictionary.
CFDictionary create mutable
creates a mutable one.
CFDictionary get count gives you
the number of key value pairs
currently stored in the dictionary.
Get value, you provide the key,
will give you the value back
associated with that key.
And set value allows you to
associate a value with a given key.
So now that we've looked
at those basic APIs,
let's talk about collections
in more general terms.
All of our collections
contain pointer-sized values.
As I said, most of the time,
you're going to be storing other objects,
but not always.
So how do you configure
the behavior differently,
depending on what's being stored?
Well,
that's what the callbacks are all about.
You pass the callbacks when the
collection is first created.
And the callbacks tell the object
what to do as objects are being added
and removed from the collection.
Collections can also be created
either mutable or immutable,
and we'll go into both callbacks
and mutability in greater detail.
Okay.
So as I said,
callbacks determine what the array
or the dictionary is going to do
as values are added or removed.
90% of the time,
you're going to be storing other
CF objects inside of the collection.
When that happens,
use the default callbacks we provide.
So for example,
KCF type array callbacks is the set
of callbacks you use for an array
that's going to store CF types.
As you would expect,
as objects are added to an array,
this set of callbacks will
retain the objects on the way in,
release them on the way out.
Of the remaining 10% of the time,
9% of that is going to be,
your collections are probably
going to hold pointers that you
just want to manage yourself.
You would rather the collection
does not do any management for you.
When that's the case, simply pass null.
At that point, CFArray, CFDictionary,
all the collections will
simply take their hands off.
You give it a pointer value,
it'll hold the pointer value,
but it won't do anything with it.
Once in a blue moon,
you will be using CFArray or
CFDictionary to store a special
data structure that has its
own memory management scheme.
This is the point at which you're
going to be writing your own callbacks.
You will have to add functions that
define how the object is retained
on the way into the collection,
how it should be released on the way out,
and then you will pass those
callbacks to CFArray or whatever
collection you're using.
Moving on to mutability.
There are three kinds of
mutability in this system.
An immutable object, as you would expect,
you can change neither
the contents nor the size.
Once the object has been created,
the data is going to remain constant
until the object is destroyed.
A fixed-size collection:
you can change the contents all you want,
as long as you do not
exceed the given capacity.
And a fully mutable collection:
you can change the contents and the size.
Not all of the collections support
all of the kinds of mutability.
Both array and dictionary do.
When you're in doubt,
check the documentation.
The documentation clearly marks
what kinds of mutability are
supported by which collections.
And also, I wanted to mention here,
although CFString and CFData are not
themselves collections of other objects,
conceptually,
a string is a collection of characters,
and data is a collection of bytes.
And therefore,
we use these mutability principles
for both CFString and CFData as well.
And they also support all
three types of mutability.
So the way it works is this:
when you call CFString create,
CFArray create, whatever,
you're going to get back
a fully immutable object.
When you call CFArrayCreateMutable,
you will get back a mutable object.
If the specified capacity
is greater than zero,
that will be taken as the maximum
capacity for your collection.
So CFArrayCreateMutable with a
capacity of 10 produces an array that
can never hold more than 10 objects.
On the other hand,
if you pass a capacity of zero,
we will create a fully
mutable object for you,
and the array or string or
dictionary will automatically
grow as new objects are added in.
So, for example,
CFArray create is going to
produce an immutable array.
You just provide the objects that
are going in and the number of them,
and there you go.
CFDictionary create mutable,
passing a capacity of 10,
creates a mutable dictionary
that can never contain more
than 10 key value pairs.
CFString Create Mutable,
passing a capacity of zero,
produces a fully mutable
string of unlimited length,
and as strings and characters
are added to this string,
it will grow to accommodate them.
So, how does this all come together?
Well,
given these basic pieces of strings,
datas, arrays, and dictionaries,
you can actually build up some
very complex trees of objects.
We also support several other types,
but String, Data, Array,
and Dictionary form the core of them.
There are a couple restrictions.
First of all, it has to be a true tree,
no loops,
so arrays can't include themselves,
dictionaries can't include themselves.
Secondly, the keys of the dictionaries
must always be strings.
And we create an abstraction
on top of such a structure and
call it a CF property list ref.
So why are property lists useful?
They're useful because
we make them persistent.
They have a simple,
flattened XML representation,
and you can easily convert to and from
that flattened XML representation,
expressed as a data,
and the rich tree structure.
Now, we do not handle the
file access part of this.
As a rule, Core Foundation does not
touch the file system.
So it's up to you to read and
write the data to and from whatever
file you're taking it from.
So why does this make
property lists useful?
It's useful because property
lists are very easy to program.
They're small.
They're very, very flexible.
If you need to represent new data,
just tack another object onto the end
of the array or create a new string.
And as I said, they're persistent.
The API for persistency
is very straightforward.
So, if you ever find
yourself needing a small,
flexible data format of some kind,
try out CF Property Lists.
See if it'll manage your needs.
The one caveat here is,
property lists are not
useful as a general database.
It does not scale well,
and that's because XML is a
serialized data representation.
So there's no ability to scan
into the middle and locate
an object out of the middle.
So for example,
if you look in Mac OS X where
we use property lists ourselves,
you'll find them in small
configuration files all over the place.
We use them to configure
applications and provide much of
the information that Finder needs,
for instance,
when viewing an app package.
Plug-ins use configuration
files to announce their APIs,
as well as announcing
how they fulfill the API.
There are a number of small
system Unix-y kind of parameter
configuration files that have
been migrated to property lists.
We also use them for the user
preferences on this system.
User preferences is a classic example
of where we don't know what information
a given application needs to store,
but we do know that
it's likely to be small,
and we do know that our types
are likely to accommodate them.
[Transcript missing]
So you need to deliver
an application yesterday?
You might well prototype using
property lists as your data store.
That will at least save you
the burden of figuring out
what your final data format is,
and we found it remarkably flexible
for doing quick prototyping.
In fact,
the original HTML rendering engine
in the Cocoa framework used property
lists entirely for its backing store.
So I mentioned there were some
other property list types.
These are very simple object wrappers
that you would rarely use except
that you need to store a particular
kind of value in a property list.
The three most common are listed here:
CFDate, Wraps a date or time, CFNumber,
and CFBoolean wrap simple numeric values.
And again,
we're not suggesting that you use this in
place of a raw integer or a raw Boolean.
Rather, when you find you need to store
such a value in a property list,
these wrappers are available to do that.
Okay.
Debugging and getting help.
I mentioned earlier that there
is a debug library available
inside of Core Foundation.
What the debug library adds is
a number of extra assertions,
argument checking, that kind of thing.
And what happens is as soon
as one of those assertions
finds an invalid argument,
it's going to log an error
and abort your program.
That's going to make it much
easier to isolate the problem,
find the change, get a good backtrace.
And we found that many of the most
common programming errors we see with
Core Foundation can be caught this way.
So please run against the debug library
as you develop Core Foundation code.
I've also put a list here
of the most common errors in
programming with Core Foundation.
Passing null is a CF type.
There's a classic one.
Null is not a CF type.
It is not a valid argument to any of the
pseudo-methods inside of Core Foundation.
Another common error is releasing
the return value of a get function.
You call CFArray getValue.
You never got a reference,
the function includes the word get,
but you release it anyway.
Well, sooner or later that array
is going to be destroyed,
or someone else is going to
remove that value from the array.
At that point,
the array will release the object itself.
Boom, memory smasher.
The other half of that equation is
failing to retain the value that
came back from a get function.
So once again, you get a value out of
CFArray using CFArrayGetValue.
You intend to keep that value
past the lifetime of the array.
You need to retain it.
If you do not, when the array disappears,
so does your object.
Okay,
so there you are in a debugging session.
You've got a CF type,
you don't know what it is,
and you're trying to figure
out what's gone wrong.
Use CF get-type-ID to determine
the class of the object you've got.
You can compare that with
CF type name get-type-ID.
So CFString get-type-ID returns
the type ID for all strings.
CFArray get-type-ID returns
the type ID for all arrays.
CF Show will print out any
CF object to the console,
or wherever standard out happens to be.
In GDB, you can invoke CF Show directly
from within a breakpoint.
It's very useful for looking at what
exactly has gotten into your string.
If you would rather get that
information into memory,
use CF copy description,
and it will give you
exactly the same output,
but stored in a CFString, so you can,
if you want, write it to file,
look at it later, whatever.
Tracking memory problems
that occur in this system.
CFGEP retain count will always return
the current reference count of an object.
You can use that to make sure that
the reference count is incrementing
or decrementing as you expect.
You can install a custom default
allocator and use that to locate
leaks and memory corruption.
And finally, if you look on a DP4 system,
there's an application in
System Developer Applications
called ObjectAlloc.
You can run your program
under ObjectAlloc,
and it will show you some of the CF types
as they are allocated and destroyed.
All of the common ones are there:
CFString, Array, Dictionary,
all that kind of stuff.
Finally, there's a fair bit of
documentation online.
You can find it in
System Developer Documentation
Core Foundation on the DP4 CD.
It's also available on the web at
developer.apple.com/techpubs/corefound
ation.
There is some example code inside of
System Developer Examples Core Foundation
.
And the release notes are available
in System Developer Documentation
release notes:
corefoundation.html.